Brief Migration Notes

$Id: MigrationNotes,v 1.1 2004-11-22 22:13:39 wedgingt Exp $

This file is intended to help users of the prior Europa (in the
NewPlan CVS tree) planning system migrate their projects to this
version, Europa 2 (informally known as PLASMA during its initial
development, which is still in progress at this time).

This is a draft document likely to be modified fairly often as issues
are noticed.  New issues are likely to be simply appended to the end
without regard to importance or any other criteria, at least until the
first official release of Europa 2 (PLASMA).

1. Explicit bounds on timepoints of tokens (whether between two tokens
or to absolute time values) are not supported in XML transaction
files.  This may be an issue when translating NewPlan style initial
state files to NDDL or XML transaction files.

2. In NewPlan, there is only one class Domain.  In PLASMA, there are
many: EnumeratedDomain, StringDomain, SymbolDomain, ObjectDomain,
IntervalDomain, IntervalIntDomain, etc.  Also, each enumeration (label
set, in NewPlan terms) will have its own C++ class for its domains.

3. For several reasons, re-using (C++) domain variables is not as
simple as in NewPlan.  First, assigning or specifying a domain will
error out if it is not a subset of the previously specified domain;
the domain must be reset (member function "reset()") in between such
specifications.  Second, open domains can be closed but cannot be
re-opened.  That, in turn, implies that propagation does not restrict
variables with open domains, because backtracking the closures is not
supported.  Third, changing the type of a C++ domain variable is, of
course, not possible during run time but could be "simulated" in
NewPlan because all C++ domain variables were of the single C++ class
Domain.

4. When the domain of the object variable of a token is closed but not
singleton, then asking any of the objects in that domain for the list
of associated tokens will include the token.  This is very different
from the behavior of NewPlan, for which such queries only return the
tokens that have already been inserted onto a timeline of the object.
(see also GNATS #?).
