#summary Release Summary for EUROPA-2.5

=== Modeling ===
 * NDDL
   * Add method invocation for predicate definition
   * add nicer error reporting for parser, verify line numbers are not lost.
   * Add [http://valgrind.org Valgrind] output and checks to regression tests

=== Search Support ===
   * Add visualization tool for search tree (see decisions made in compressed format, zoom, etc).
 
=== Architecture enhancements/re-factoring/cleanup ===
 * Consolidate configuration in a single XML file. Provide simple, internal API to access it.
 * Drop architectural assumption that Constraint Engine stops computation at first constraint violation
   * Remove this assumption from built-in solver, propagators, etc.
   * Modify Constraint Engine API?
 * Make constraint violation reporting robust : #216,#173,#204,#205, and a bunch of A4O tickets.
   * Make sure Timelines can be substituted with Unary resources under the covers so that timeline overload is reported as a violation, not as a flaw
 * Systematically expose listeners through PSEngine
 * Add State resource class

=== Visualization/Debugging tools ===
 * Provide logging api for standard (log4j) logging behavior. Support with our home-grown logging class first, also possibly with log4cxx : #142
 * Come up with a plan to integrate Tatiana's UI work into distribution
 * Provide schema browser : #38
 * Improve gantt chart : #39,#40

=== Automated Build ===
 * Report test failures correctly on windows : #252
 * Add missing regression tests
     * PSEngine : #219
     * constraint violation reporting : #220
 * Add plan comparison to regression tests : #50, #104
 * Add performance measurements to regression tests and autobuild : #64
 * Use [http://valgrind.org Valgrind] to verify sound memory management
 * Set up bitten build for Solaris

=== Documentation ===
 * Improve PSEngine docs :  #221
 * Architecture
 * Add mandatory tips & tricks for beginners (ask Conor to get input from interns as they become EUROPA users)
 * Add specific section on debugging
 * Add docs for power user

=== Bug Fixes ===